# Homework Assignment 0

**Due:** Tuesday, February 16 at 11:59 pm EST\
**Total available points:** 105\
**Maximum points:** 100

## Getting Started

1. Follow the [Course Environment Configuration Guide](/wk00/setup) to and set up your computer for the course.
2. Tell us what your GitHub username is: <https://tufts.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_cHY84bISwR0om0e>
3. Go to [Canvas](https://canvas.tufts.edu/courses/27438/assignments) or [Piazza](https://piazza.com/tufts/spring2021/uep239/resources) and follow the **GitHub Classroom** link for this assignment.
4. When prompted, log in with your GitHub account (use the same username you submitted in step #2).
5. Select your Tufts UTLN from the list. This will link your GitHub account to your UTLN for the remainder of the course. **If your UTLN does not appear on the list _and_ you are taking this course for credit, notify course staff immediately.**
6. Confirm your selection and then accept the assignment.
7. Wait a little and then refresh the page. Repeat until the creation of your assignment repository is confirmed.
8. Navigate to your assignment repository. You should also be able to get to it via the [course GitHub profile](https://github.com/uep239).
9. Click on the green button labelled **Code** in the upper-right and copy either the **SSH address** for your repository or the **GitHub CLI command** to clone your repository (if you have set that up).
10. Open Terminal or Windows Terminal (both will be referred to as *Terminal* going forward).
11. Using the `cd` command, navigate to a directory where you would like to place assignments for this course.
12. **Clone** the repository as follows (refer to the tab corresponding to the method you are using):
    ````{tabbed} SSH
    Assuming you have copied the SSH address for your Github repo, you can construct the **clone** command as follows:
    ```sh
    git clone [SSH address]
    ```
    The whole command should look like the following, with your GitHub username instead of the placeholder:
    ```sh
    git clone git@github.com:uep239/hw00-USERNAME.git
    ```
    ````
    ````{tabbed} GitHub CLI
    If you copied the GitHub CLI command, feel free to just paste and run it. Otherwise, you can construct the **clone** command as follows, replacing your GitHub username with the placeholder:
    ```sh
    gh repo clone uep239/hw00-USERNAME
    ```
    ````
13. A new folder called `hw00-USERNAME` (with your GitHub username instead of the placeholder) gets created in your current working directory. This folder is your assignment repository.
14. Using the `cd` command, navigate into your assignment repository. If you have configured your terminal to display Git status, you should see it now. Otherwise, run `git status` to confirm you are in a Git repository.
15. To confirm you have properly set up conda on your computer, run the following command:
    ```sh
    conda env export > environment.yml
    ```
16. This will create a new file called `environment.yml` in your repository. Now add it to your staging area as follows:
    ```sh
    git add environment.yml
    ```
17. Commit this change by running the following command (note the descriptive commit message):
    ```sh
    git commit -m "created environment.yml"
    ```
18. Open the included README template `README.md` using Visual Studio Code or your other favorite text editor. If using Visual Studio Code, you can run `code README.md` to launch the editor and open the file.
19. Update the README with your name and save the changes.
20. Create a new file called `os.txt` into your repository. Feel free to do this via the command line or using a text editor. The contents of the file should be a single word denoting your operating system. Acceptable values are `Windows`, `macOS`, and `Linux`.
21. Run `git status` to see the current status of your Git repository.
22. Instead of using `git add [filename]` to add specific files to the staging area, you can use `git add -A` to add all changes in your repository to the staging area. Use this to add `os.txt` and the changes done to `README.md` to the staging area:
    ```sh
    git add -A
    ```
23. Run `git status` again and see what has changed. Then commit the stages changes using an appropriate message:
    ```sh
    git commit -m "created os.txt and updated README with my name"
    ```
24. Run `git status` again and see what has changed. Then push all committed changes to the GitHub server:
    ```sh
    git push
    ```
25. Navigate to your assignment repository on GitHub and see how all changes are now reflected there.

As you keep working on this assignment, keep track of your work by taking snapshots using `git add` and `git commit` where appropriate. Make sure to use helpful and descriptive commit messages to help future you understand what each snapshot corresponds to. Feel free to use `git status` anytime to gain a better understanding of what is going on in your repository and `git --help` if you ever forget a command or would like to learn additional commands. Do not forget to push your changes to GitHub using `git push`. You do not have to run this after *every* commit, but keep in mind that commits that are not pushed are not backed up on GitHub servers. Remember to run `git push` after finishing the assignment to make sure all of your work is uploaded to GitHub and available for grading!

Also keep in mind the following useful commands when working on the assignment:

- `ii .` or `open .` to open the current directory in File Explorer or Finder
- `code .`  or `code [filename]` to open the current directory or a specific file in Visual Studio Code
- `New-Item [filename]` or `touch [filename]` to create a new file


## Formal Pseudocode

Assume a language that only has the following mathematical commands:

- `add X to Y` that returns the result of $X + Y$
- `negate X` that is the same as $-X$

Knowing this, we could define a new command `subtract X from Y` as follows:

1. Let `Z` be the result of `negate X`
2. Return the result of `add Y to Z`

Furthermore, assume this language has a concept of repeating actions until a certain condition is met using words like *while* or *until* and that we are able to compare numbers using instructions like *greater than*, *less than*, *equal to*, and combinations of those. Like this, we could create a new command `count from one to ten` as follows:

1. Let `X` be `1`
2. While `X` is less than or equal to `10`:
    1. Announce the value of `X`
    2. Let `X` be the result of `add 1 to X`

Additionally, assume this language has a concept of conditionals – you can use words like *if* and *else* to perform certain actions when certain conditions are met (or not). Conditions can also be combined using words like *and* and *or*, and negated using words like *not*. That allows use to create a new command `absolute value of X` as follows:

- If `X` is less than `0`:
    - Return the value of `negate X`
- Else:
    - Return the value of `X`

Knowing this, do the following:

1. Create a file `multiply.md` that defines a new command `multiply X by Y` that returns the result of $X \times Y$.
2. Create a file `square.md` that defines a new command `square X` that returns the value of $X^2$.
3. Create a file `power.md` that defines a new command `X to the power of Y` that returns the value of $floor(X^Y)$.
4. Create a file `divide.md` that defines a new command `divide X by Y` that returns the value of $floor(X \div Y)$.
5. Create a file `modulo.md` that defines a new command `X modulo Y` that returns the value of $|X| \bmod |Y|$.

All of your commands should work with positive integers, negative integers, and zero. To avoid having to deal with odd situations involving floating-point numbers and ambiguous signs, note that some operations involve [**floor**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floor_and_ceiling_functions) operations and others involve [absolute values](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Absolute_value). Division by zero, modulo zero, zero to the power of zero, and zero to a negative power are all undefined in real life and can be undefined in your commands, meaning that your commands can return whatever and behave however when attempting to perform these operations.

Here are some test cases for your commands:

- `multiply 5 by 2` and `multiply -5 by -2` should both return `10`
- `multiply 5 by -2` and `multiply -5 by 2` should both return `-10`
- `multiply 0 by 2` should return `0`
- `square 5` and `square -5` should both should return `25`
- `square 0` should return `0`
- `2 to the power of 6`  and `-2 to the power of 6` should both return `64`
- `-2 to the power of 5` should return `-32`
- `2 to the power of -5` and `2 to the power of -6` should return `0`
- `-2 to the power of -5` should return `-1`
- `-2 to the power of -6` should return `0`
- `2 to the power of 0` and `-2 to the power of 0` should both return `1`
- `divide 5 by 2` and `divide -5 by -2` should both return `2`
- `divide -5 by 2` and `divide 5 by -2` should both return `-3`
- `5 modulo 2` and `5 modulo -2` should both return `1`

Feel free to reference any other commands in a command definition, as long as you do not create a circular dependency (where one command refers to another command that in turn refers back to the first command). You are also free to use any commands defined in this assignment specification. If you are struggling, define all commands first assuming only positive inputs. Then figure out what changes when using negative inputs or zero. Generous partial credit is available for commands that only work using positive inputs.


## Abstract Pseudocode

Assume this is a valid recipe for a peanut butter and jelly sandwich:

1. Take a piece of bread and spread peanut butter on it.
2. Take another piece of bread and spread jelly on it.
3. Combine the two pieces of bread, peanut butter and jelly sides touching.

Assume this is a valid recipe for a ham sandwich:

1. Take a piece of bread and spread mayo on it.
2. Place the piece of bread with mayo on a plate, mayo side facing up.
3. Place a slice of cheese on top of the bread.
4. Place a slice of ham on top of the cheese.
5. Place sliced pickles on top of the ham.
6. Place slices of tomato on top of the pickles.
7. Place lettuce on top of the tomato.
8. Take a piece of bread and spread mustard on it.
9. Place the pice of bread with mustard on top of the lettuce, mustard side facing down.

Furthermore, assume the following:
- A peanut butter and Nutella sandwich is similar to a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, but with Nutella instead of jelly.
- A peanut butter sandwich is similar to a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, but with peanut butter on both slices.
- A turkey sandwich is similar to a ham sandwich, except the slice of ham is replaced with a slice of turkey.
- A cheese sandwich is similar to a ham sandwich, except it has another slice of cheese instead of the slice of ham.

Knowing this, do the following:

1. Write a recipe for making a peanut butter and Nutella sandwich and save it to a file called `nutella.md`. Then write another recipe for making a peanut butter sandwich and save it to a file `peanut.md`. Use Markdown formatting to highlight any differences between these recipes and the original peanut butter and jelly recipe.
2. Write a recipe for making a turkey sandwich and save it to a file called `turkey.md`. Then write another recipe for making a cheese sandwich and save it to a file `cheese.md`. Use Markdown formatting to highlight any differences between these recipes and the original ham sandwich recipe.
3. Can you come up with a single universal recipe that can be used to create any sweet sandwich involving spreads? At a minimum, this recipe should allow for the creation of a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, a peanut butter and Nutella sandwich, and a peanut butter sandwich. The recipe itself should be as compact as possible, but it is okay if the sandwich maker has to do boring and repetitive tasks. Write this recipe to a file called `sweet.md`.
4. Now do the same for savory sandwiches and come up with a single universal recipe that can be used to create any sandwich involving meat and cheese slices. At a minimum, this recipe should allow for the creation of a ham sandwich, a turkey sandwich, and a cheese sandwich. Write this recipe to a file called `savory.md`.
5. Can you come up with a single universal sandwich recipe that can be used to make both sweet and savory sandwiches? Do you think it makes sense to have a recipe like this? Write your recipe or your arguments against creating an universal sandwich recipe into a file called `universal.md`.

## Submission Details

Make sure to use `git push` to push any commits to the GitHub server before the end of the grace period. Any changes not reflected on GitHub by the end of the grace period will not be considered. If you feel like you need more time, reach out the the instructor and we will work something out.

Please include the approximate number of hours spent on this assignment in your README (including time spent on setting up your computer). Also use the README to outline the details of your submission, cite any references, and note anyone you received help from or discussed the assignment with. Additionally, feel free to utilize the README to provide feedback and share your thoughts. For an additional two (2) points, include a funny image in your README using Markdown syntax. If you *jazzed up* your terminal when configuring your computer for the course, include a screenshot of your *jazzed up* terminal for an extra three (3) points. The screenshot should be present in your repository and mentioned in your README.

All of your Markdown files should be neatly formatted and pleasant to read both as raw text and rendered Markdown text. Check the Visual Studio Code or GitHub Markdown preview before submitting to ensure your files look as you expect.

Points will be awarded as follows:

-  Getting Started (15)
    - `environment.yml` (14)
    - `os.txt` (1)
- Formal Pseudocode (60)
    - `multiply.md` (12)
    - `square.md` (12)
    - `power.md` (12)
    - `divide.md` (12)
    - `modulo.md` (12)
- Abstract Pseudocode (20)
    - `nutella.md` (1)
    - `peanut.md` (1)
    - `turkey.md` (1)
    - `cheese.md` (1)
    - `sweet.md` (5)
    - `savory.md` (5)
    - `universal.md` (6)
- Other (10)
    - `README.md` (3 + 2)
    - Repository activity (1)
    - Good commit messages (1)
    - Screenshot of *jazzed up* terminal (3)
