# Homework Assignment 1

**Due:** Tuesday, February 23 at 11:59 pm EST\
**Total available points:** 120\
**Maximum points:** 100

As with the previous assignment, you should follow the **GitHub Classroom** link on [Canvas](https://canvas.tufts.edu/courses/27438/assignments) or [Piazza](https://piazza.com/tufts/spring2021/uep239/resources) to have an assignment repository generated for you. Then you should clone the assignment repository to your computer and do all work there. Keep track of your work using consistent commits and remember to push your work to the GitHub server to back it up.

## Working on the Command-Line

For this section, please complete the assignments as specified for your operating system. Windows users are expected to submit PowerShell (`.ps1`) scripts and macOS users should submit Bash scripts with the appropriate shebang operator (`#!/bin/bash`) on the first line. For extra credit, submit both a PowerShell script and a Bash script for each assignment. Windows users can use **Git Bash** (*Start > Git > Git Bash*) to test Bash scripts and macOS users are welcome to install [**PowerShell Core**](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/releases/latest) if they would like to experiment with PowerShell scripts.

### A Simple Shell Script

Each script is worth five (5) points. Submit both a PowerShell and a Bash script for a total of ten (10) points.

````{tabbed} Windows
1. Create a file named `hello.ps1` into your assignment repository with the following contents:
    ```powershell
    echo "Hello, world!"
    ```
2. Using **Windows Terminal** (or any other PowerShell interface) navigate to your assignment repository and run the following command to execute the script:
    ```powershell
    .\hello.ps1
    ```
3. Confirm that the output is as you would expect:
    ```text
    Hello, world!
    ```
4. Remember to commit this file to your repository and push it to the server!
````
````{tabbed} macOS
1. Create a file named `hello` into your assignment repository with the following contents:
    ```bash
    #!/bin/bash
    echo "Hello, world!"
    ```
2. Using **Terminal** (or any other Bash interface) navigate to your assignment repository and run the following command to allow the script to be executed:
    ```bash
    chmod 755 hello
    ```
3. Now run the following command to execute the script:
    ```bash
    ./hello
    ```
4. Confirm that the output is as you would expect:
    ```text
    Hello, world!
    ```
5. Remember to commit this file to your repository and push it to the server!
````

### A More Advanced Shell Script
Create a PowerShell script called `kingarthur.ps1` or a Bash script called `kingarthur` that creates a directory called `holygrail` into whichever directory the script is run from. The contents and structure of the `holygrail` directory should be as follows:

```text
📂holygrail
 ┣ 📄question.txt
 ┣ 📄answer.txt
 ┗ 📂meta
    ┣ 📄dir.txt
    ┗ 📄time.txt
```

The contents of the text files should be as follows:
- `question.txt` should contain `What is the airspeed velocity of an unladen swallow?`
- `answer.txt` should contain `What do you mean? An African or European swallow?`
- `dir.txt` should contain the **full path** of the created `holygrail` directory (not the `meta` directory) in any format
- `time.txt` should contain the date and time the script was executed in any format

Hints and suggestions:
- You might want to search the web for a command that gives you the current date and time, or just try some potnetial command names until you find one that works.
- If you are writing a Bash script, do not forget to include the the shebang operator (`#!/bin/bash`) and remember that you have to use `chmod 755` to allow the script to be executed in order to test it.

A working PowerShell **or** Bash implementation is worth 20 points. Extra credit will be awarded as follows:
- For an additional five (5) points, make sure the date and time in `time.txt` is in `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS` 24-hour format.
- For an additional ten (10) points, submit **both** a PowerShell **and** a Bash script.


## Getting Started with Python

All Python programs should be submitted as `.py` files and work as described when executed using the `python filename.py` command. These exercises are all fairly simple and do not require the use of any data structures like lists or advanced control flow statements like loops and conditionals. All you need are basic arithmetic, string arithmetic, the `math` module, the `turtle` module, string methods, and the `input()` function.

```{attention}
Note that the `input()` function always returns a string. You can use `int()` or `float()` to convert a suitable string into a desired numeric datatype.
```
```{note}
You need to import any module you would like to use. For example, to use functions from the `math` module, you should use `from math import *` to import all the functions included in the module. You can also import the whole module using `import math`, but then you need to type `math.sqrt()` instead of `sqrt()` to use the square root function.
```

Here are some resources that might be helpful:
 - `input()` function reference: <https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#input>
 - `math` module reference: <https://docs.python.org/3/library/math.html>
 - `turtle` module reference: <https://docs.python.org/3/library/turtle.html>
 - Brief overview of Python string methods: <https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_ref_string.asp>
 - Official Python string methods reference: <https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#string-methods>

### Hello World
Write a Python program called `hello.py` that outputs the following when executed:
```text
Hello, world!
```

### Mathematical Equations
Write a Python program called `equations.py` that outputs the results of the following mathematical equations. The results of the equations should be outputted in order, one per line.

$$
    (2^{89} + 5^{70})^2
$$
$$
    6 + \sqrt[4]{6 \times 5 + 12}
$$
$$
    \sqrt{16^2 + 43^2}
$$
$$
    \ln(e^{27} + 2^{30}) + \sin(\arccos(\pi \div 4))
$$

The result of the second equation should be `8.54572989502183`. Knowing this, your program should output something that resembles the following:
```text
-999
8.54572989502183
-999
-999
```

Obviously, `-999` should be replaced with the actual value of the corresponding equation. And no, you cannot just use `print(8.54572989502183)` for the second equation instead of typing it out in Python.

```{tip}
You might want to use the `math` module for this. Make sure your script begins with some kind of `import` statement.
```

### Simple Calculator
Write a Python program called `calculator.py` that asks the user for two integers $X$ and $Y$ and then outputs the following:

- $X + Y$
- $X - Y$
- $X \times Y$
- $X \div Y$
- $X ^ Y$

You can assume both inputs will always be integers. This is an example of what execution of your program should look like:
```text
Enter integer X: 5
Enter integer Y: 2
X + Y = 7
X - Y = 3
X * Y = 10
X / Y = 2.5
X ^ Y = 25
```

### Triangle
Modify the `triangle.py` script included in your assignment repository to ask the end user the length of the triangle side instead of using a predetermined number. You can assume that the end user will always enter a positive integer as input.

### Square
Create a Python program called `square.py` that asks the end user for their desired square side length and then uses `turtle` to draw a square with the specified side length. Feel free to use `triangle.py` as an inspiration. Again, you can assume input will always be a positive integer.

### Another Square
Create a Python program called `shape.py` that asks the end user for a number and then constructs a square using `#` symbols with each side of the square consisting of the specified number of `#` symbols. Yor program is only expected to work with inputs that are positive integers greater than or equal to two (2).

Here are some examples of how your program should behave:
```text
Enter a number greater than or equal to two: 2
##
##
```
```text
Enter a number greater than or equal to two: 3
###
# #
###
```
```text
Enter a number greater than or equal to two: 7
#######
#     #
#     #
#     #
#     #
#     #
#######
```
```{tip}
You should not feel the need to use loops or anything like that. All you need for this is string arithmetic.
```

### Text in a Box
Write a Python program called `box.py` that draws a box around any input it takes. Here is what it should look like:
```text
Enter some text: test
+----+
|test|
+----+
```
```text
Enter some text: This is just a test.
+--------------------+
|This is just a test.|
+--------------------+
```
```{tip}
Do you know how the get the length of a string? A quick web search should reveal a function that does just that.
```

### Word Analyzer
Write a Python program `ratio.py` that asks the end user to input a word and then outputs the vowel to consonant ratio for said word. You can assume that all inputs will be single words composed using only the 26 letters of the English alphabet. While you can assume that the input will not contain any characters that are not letters, the letters themselves may be either uppercase or lowercase. The vowels of the English alphabet are `a`, `e`, `i`, `o`, and `u`. All other letters are consonants. The vowel to consonant ratio for any word is the number of vowels in the word divided by the number of consonants.

Here are some examples of what execution of your program should look like:
```text
Enter a word: test
The vowel to consonant ratio for the word "test" is 0.3333333333333333
```
```text
Enter a word: Dog
The vowel to consonant ratio for the word "dog" is 0.5
```
```text
Enter a word: CODE
The vowel to consonant ratio for the word "code" is 1.0
```
```text
Enter a word: aMeBOa
The vowel to consonant ratio for the word "ameboa" is 2.0
```
```{tip}
There are two string methods that are highly useful here. You also need to know how to get the length of a string.
```

## Submission Details

Make sure to use `git push` to push any commits to the GitHub server before the end of the grace period. Any changes not reflected on GitHub by the end of the grace period will not be considered. If you feel like you need more time, reach out the the instructor and we will work something out.

Your README should document all scripts and programs in your repository. A good documentation outlines the inputs and outputs, instructs the end user how to run your program, and outlines any limitations of your implementation. Remember to also include the number of hours you spent working on this assignment, cite any references, and note anyone you received help from or discussed the assignment with. Additionally, feel free to utilize the README to provide feedback and share your thoughts. As before, your README should be neatly formatted and pleasant to read both as raw and rendered text.

Your script files do not need to conform to any standard. However, they should be easy to read and understand. Feel free to use comments in your Python scripts wherever appropriate.

Points will be awarded as follows:

-  Working on the Command Line (25 + 20)
    - Simple Shell Script (5 + 5)
    - Advanced Shell Script (20 + 15)
- Getting Started with Python (70)
    - `hello.py` (5)
    - `equations.py` (10)
    - `calculator.py` (10)
    - `triangle.py` (5)
    - `square.py` (10)
    - `shape.py` (10)
    - `box.py` (10)
    - `ratio.py` (10)
- Other (5)
    - `README.md` (3)
    - Repository activity (1)
    - Good commit messages (1)