# Homework Assignment 2

**Due:** Thursday, March 4 at 11:59 pm EST\
**Total available points:** 120\
**Maximum points:** 100

As with the previous assignment, you should follow the **GitHub Classroom** link on [Canvas](https://canvas.tufts.edu/courses/27438/assignments) or [Piazza](https://piazza.com/tufts/spring2021/uep239/resources) to have an assignment repository generated for you. Then you should clone the assignment repository to your computer and do all work there. Keep track of your work using consistent commits and remember to push your work to the GitHub server to back it up.

```{tip}
To use a function defined in another `.py` file in the same directory, you can import it just like you would import a function from a built-in Python module or external library. For example, to use the function `function()` from the file  `filename.py` that is located in the same directory as your script, you can use `from filename import *` to import all functions defined in `filename.py` or `from filename import function` to only import the desired function. You can also use `import filename`, but then you have to refer to the function as `filename.function()` within your script.
```

## Personalized Greeting

Write a program `greeting.py` that asks the user for their name and then greets the user using the inputted name. Regardless of the capitalization of the input, the name displayed in the greeting should be properly capitalized (each part of the name should begin with a capital letter, followed by lowercase letters). In addition to working with a single word like a first name, your program should also work with and properly capitalize both multipart names (like full names) and hyphenated names. You can assume that the user always inputs something that resembles a name.

Here is an example of what execution of your program should look like:

```text
Please enter your name: uku-KASPAR uUUsTaLu
Greetings, Uku-Kaspar Uustalu!
```

## Drawing Polygons

Create a file `polygon_function.py` that contains the definition for a function `polygon(sides, length)`. The function does not return anything, but instead launches `turtle` and draws an equilateral polygon with the specified number of sides and the specified side length (in pixels). Both inputs to the function should be positive integers, but you should not check for that within the function definition. Instead, this should be noted in the docstring for the function It is up to the end user of the function to ensure they use the function with the correct datatypes.

Once you have completed the function definition, use the `polygon()` function to create the following programs:
- `triangle.py` draws an equilateral triangle with the side length specified by the user
- `square.py` draws a square with the the side length specified by the user
- `polygon_sides.py` asks the user for the desired number of sides, then asks the user for the desired side length, and finally draws the corresponding equilateral polygon

Your programs should validate user input and reject any input that does not correspond to a positive integer. `polygon_sides.py` should only accept integers `3` or higher as the number of sides.

For extra credit, define a new function that takes as input the number of sides in a polygon and the [circumradius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circumscribed_circle) of the polygon and then uses `turtle` to draw the corresponding equilateral polygon. Use this function in a program called `polygon_radius.py` that behaves just like `polygon_sides.py` but asks the user for the circumradius instead of the side length.

## Simple List Functions

Create a file `list_functions.py` that contains the definitions for the following functions:

- `count_even()` takes a list of integers and returns the number of even integers in the list
- `absolute_list()` takes a list of numbers and returns a list containing the absolute values of said numbers, in order
- `string_lengths()` takes a list of strings and returns a new list containing the lengths of said strings, in order
- `select_between()` takes a list of numbers and two numbers, returns a new list containing only the elements from the provided list that are greater than the first specified number and less than the second specified number
- `median_value()` takes a list of numbers and returns the [median value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Median) of said list

Here are some very simple examples:

- `count_even([1, 2, 3, 4])` should return `2`
- `absolute_list([-1, 0, 1])` should return `[1, 0, 1]`
- `string_lengths(['a', 'aa', 'aaa'])` should return `[1, 2, 3]`
- `select_between([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], 2, 7)` should return `[3, 4, 5, 6]`
- `median_value([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])` should return `3`
- `median_value([1, 2, 3, 4])` should return `2.5`

Make sure to thoroughly test your functions. Remember that it is up to the end user to ensure they use your functions as specified in your documentation. Your functions are allowed to err or behave unexpectedly when used incorrectly or with inappropriate datatypes. Your `list_functions.py` file should contain only the function definitions and no test code.

## Boolean Indexing

Create a file `boolean_indexing.py` that contains a function `filter()` which takes two lists as inputs. The first is a list of any length with elements of any datatypes. The second is a list of booleans (`True` and `False` values) equal in length to the first list. The function returns a new list containing elements of the first list that had a corresponding `True` in the second list.

For example `filter([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], [True, False, False, True, False, True])` should return `[1, 4, 6]`.

To earn extra credit, modify your function such that the length of the second (boolean) list can be equal to or less then the length of the first list. If the length of the second (boolean) list is less than the length of the first list, the second (boolean) list gets repeated over until each element in the first list as a corresponding boolean value. For example:
- `filter([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], [True])` should return `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]`
- `filter([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], [False])` should return `[]`
- `filter([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], [True, False])` should return `[1, 3, 5]`
- `filter([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], [False, True, True, False])` should return `[2, 3, 6]`

Test your function thoroughly. Your `boolean_indexing.py` file should contain only the function definition and no test code.

## Text Analyzer

Write a program `analyzer.py` that accepts any string as input and outputs the counts of all characters present in the string in [ASCII](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) sort order as follows:

```text
Enter some text: This is just a test.
' ': 4
'.': 1
'T': 1
'a': 1
'e': 1
'h': 1
'i': 2
'j': 1
's': 4
't': 3
'u': 1
```

## Closest Points

Define a function `euclidean_distance()` that accepts as input two tuples in the format `(x, y)` representing points on a two-dimensional plain (with `x` and `y` coordinates) and returns the [euclidean distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_distance) between those two points.

Then define a new function `closest_points()` that takes a list of points as input, where each point is a `(x, y)` coordinate tuple, and utilizes the `euclidean_distance()` function to return a tuple containing the two points in the list of points that are closest to each other, in the format `((x1, y1), (x2, y2))`. The order of the points in the returned tuple does not matter. If more than one pair of closest points exists, the function should return only one pairing, but it does not matter which one.

Here are some simple test cases for your functions:
- `euclidean_distance((0, 0), (1, 1))` should return `1.4142135623730951`
- `closest_points([(0, 0), (1, 1), (3, 3)])` should return `((0, 0), (1, 1))` or `((1, 1), (0, 0))`

Make sure to test your functions thoroughly. Both functions should be defined in the file `points.py`, which should only contain the function definitions and no test code.

## Reinventing Math

The `reinventing_math.py` file in your assignment repository contains the following function definitions:

- `add(x, y)` returns the equivalent of `x + y`
- `negate(x)` returns the equivalent of `-x`
- `subtract(x, y)` returns the equivalent of `x - y`
- `absolute(x)` returns the equivalent of `abs(x)`

Using **only** the aforementioned `add()`, `negate()` and `absolute()` functions along with loops and conditionals, add the following function definitions to the `reinventing_math.py` file:

- `multiply(x, y)` should return the equivalent of `x * y`
- `square(x)` should return the equivalent of `x ** 2`
- `power(x, y)` should return the equivalent of `math.floor(x ** y)`
- `divide(x, y)` should return the equivalent of `x // y`
- `modulo(x, y)` should return the equivalent of `abs(x) % abs(y)`

Feel free to define helper functions where appropriate and reference any previously defined functions when defining a new function. Just note that you are not allowed to use standard Python arithmetic anywhere. All arithmetic must use only the `add()`, `negate()`, `subtract()`, and `absolute()` functions and their derivatives. Division by zero, modulo zero, and zero to a negative power are not defined in Python and can be undefined in your functions, meaning that your functions can behave however and return whatever when attempting to perform these operations. Note that `0 ** 0` is defined as `1` in Python, hence `power(0, 0)` should also return `1` (even though zero to the power of zero is actually undefined in formal mathematics).

You can assume all inputs to your functions will be integers (including positive integers, negative integers, and zero). When supplied with any other input (like a floating-point number or a string), your functions can behave unexpectedly and err.

You should thoroughly test your defined functions and ensure they behave exactly as their equivalent Python expressions. Include a file `testing_math.py` in your assignment repository that outlines your testing procedure. If you somehow automate your testing procedure, you will receive generous extra credit.

## Guessing Games

Here are some tips that might be useful when working on the following programs:
- `break` and `continue` statements can be used within loops. A `break` statement stops execution of the loop and exits the loop, continuing the execution of any code that appears after the loop. A `continue` statement stops execution of the current iteration of the loop and starts execution of the following iteration from the start of the loop. Refer to the [Control Flow section of the Python Documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/controlflow.html#break-and-continue-statements-and-else-clauses-on-loops) for more information about the `break` and `continue` statements.
- The `random` module can be used to generate pseudo-random numbers. It also includes a function for generating random integers. Refer to the [`random` module documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/random.html) for additional information.

### User vs Computer

Write a program `game_user.py` where the computer randomly generates an integer between `0` and `1000` (inclusive) and the player has to guess the number in ten attempts. After each incorrect guess, the computer tells the player whether their guess was too high or too low. A correct guess results in a congratulatory message. If the player runs out of guesses, the computer reveals the number and notifies the player of their loss.

Here is an example gameplay where the number generated by the computer is `375`:

```text
I have thought of an integer between zero and one thousand. You have 10 attempts to guess it.
Please enter your guess: 500
That guess is too high. You have 9 attempts left.
Please enter your guess: 250
That guess is too low. You have 8 attempts left.
Please enter your guess: 375
That guess is correct! Congratulations! You have won the game in 3 attempts.
```

Here is the end of an example gameplay where the user fails to guess the number:

```text
That guess is too high. You have 2 attempts left.
Please enter your guess: 13
That guess is too low. This is your last attempt.
Please enter your guess: 66
That guess is too high. You are out of attempts. The correct number was 42. Game over!
```

If the user enters anything that is not an integer, the computer should ask the user to try again:

```text
I have thought of an integer between zero and one thousand. You have 10 attempts to guess it.
Please enter your guess: gibberish
That does not appear to be an integer. Please try again. You have 10 attempts left.
Please enter your guess:
```

The user can end the game anytime by typing `exit`:

```text
I have thought of an integer between zero and one thousand. You have 10 attempts to guess it.
Please enter your guess: exit
The correct number was 42. Goodbye!
```

Be mindful of whether you should be using singular or plural versions of nous. For example, let's say the number generated by the computer is `500` and the user guesses it in one attempt:

```text
I have thought of an integer between zero and one thousand. You have 10 attempts to guess it.
Please enter your guess: 500
That guess is correct! Congratulations! You have won the game in one attempt.
```

### Computer vs User

Write a program `game_computer.py` where the user thinks of an integer between `0` and `1000` (inclusive) and the computer attempts to guess it. After each guess, the user tells the computer whether the guess was `too high`, `too low`, or `correct`. Assuming the user does not cheat, your program should need at most ten attempts to guess any integer between `0` and `1000`. The user can end the game anytime by typing `exit`. If the user enters input the computer does not understand, the computer should notify the user and ask for input again.

Here is an example gameplay where the number the user thought of was `625`:

```text
Please think of a number between zero and one thousand. I will try to guess it.
My guess is 500. How is it?
Please enter "too high", "too low", "correct", or "exit": too low
My guess is 750. How is it?
Please enter "too high", "too low", "correct", or "exit": gibberish
Sorry, I did not understand that. My guess is 750. How is it?
Please enter "too high", "too low", "correct", or "exit": too high
My guess is 625. How is it?
Please enter "too high", "too low", "correct", or "exit": correct
Yay! Thank your for playing!
```

## Submission Details

Make sure to use `git push` to push any commits to the GitHub server before the end of the grace period. Any changes not reflected on GitHub by the end of the grace period will not be considered. If you feel like you need more time, reach out the the instructor and we will work something out.

Your README should document all scripts and programs in your repository. A good documentation outlines the inputs and outputs, instructs the end user how to run your program, and outlines any limitations of your implementation. Remember to also include the number of hours you spent working on this assignment, cite any references, and note anyone you received help from or discussed the assignment with. Additionally, feel free to utilize the README to provide feedback and share your thoughts. As before, your README should be neatly formatted and pleasant to read both as raw and rendered text.

Your code should include comments and [docstrings](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0257/) where appropriate and adhere to the [PEP 8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/) standard within reason. Make sure to thoroughly test your scripts before submitting!

Points will be awarded as follows:

- Personalized Greeting (5)
- Drawing Polygons (10 + 5)
    - `polygon_function.py` (5)
    - `triangle.py` (1)
    - `square.py` (1)
    - `polygon_sides.py` (3)
    - `polygon_radius.py` (5)
- Simple List Functions (10)
    - `count_even` (2)
    - `absolute_list` (2)
    - `string_lengths` (2)
    - `select_between` (2)
    - `median_value` (2)
- Boolean Indexing (10 + 5)
- Text Analyzer (10)
- Closest Points (15)
    - `euclidean_distance` (5)
    - `closest_points` (10)
- Reinventing Math (15 + 10)
    - `reinventing_math.py` (10)
    - `testing_math.py` (5 + 10)
- Guessing Games (20)
    - `game_user.py` (10)
    - `game_computer.py` (10)
- Other (5)
    - `README.md` (3)
    - Repository activity (1)
    - Good commit messages (1)