# Homework Assignment 3

**Due:** Wednesday, March 17 at 11:59 pm EST\
**Total available points:** 150\
**Maximum points:** 100

As with the previous assignment, you should follow the **GitHub Classroom** link on {{ canvas_link }} or {{ piazza_link }} to have an assignment repository generated for you. Then you should clone the assignment repository to your computer and do all work there. Keep track of your work using consistent commits and remember to push your work to the GitHub server to back it up.

## Palindrome Extractor

Write a program `palindrome.py` that does the following:
1. Asks the user to specify an input file. This file is expected to contain a list of words, with one word on each line.
2. Asks the user to specify output file. This file should get created if it does not exist or overwritten if it does.
3. Extracts all the palindromes from the input file and writes them to the output file, with one word on each line. All the words in the output file should be lowercase, regardless of how they appeared in the input file.
4. Informs the user how many palindromes were detected.

Your `palindrome.py` script should contain at least the following:
1. The definition of a function `is_palindrome()` that behaves as follows:
    - Takes a single string as input and always errs when used with any input that is not a single string.
    - Returns a boolean: `True` if the specified string is a palindrome, `False` otherwise.
2. The definition of a `main()` function. This function should contain any code that should get executed when a user runs the program. (For example, asking the end user for input usually belongs in the `main()` function.)
3. The following code block that ensures the `main()` function is invoked if and ony if the script is executed as a program (and not when the script gets imported into another script for example):
    ```python
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()
    ```

A palindrome is a word that is the same read backwards. Note that this definition is case-insensitive, meaning that for example `Racecar` and `racecar` are both palindromes. To clarify this further, here are some examples on how your `is_palindrome()` function should behave:
- `is_palindrome('a')` should return `True`
- `is_palindrome('mom')` should return `True`
- `is_palindrome('kayak')` should return `True`
- `is_palindrome('Kayak')` should return `True`
- `is_palindrome('palindrome')` should return `False`

Your program should be very user-friendly and not display any scary errors if the user makes an error. Instead, you should use `try ... except` to display user-friendly error messages in case any of the following happens:
- The specified input file does not exist or the program is unable to read the specified input file.
- The program is unable to create or overwrite the specified output file.

You do not need to worry about validating or concatenating file paths. The end user can either specify a filename (in which case it is assumed the filename is in the same directory the script is executed in) or a full path to the file. In either case, you can just pass the user input directly into `open()` and use `try ... except` to catch any errors that might result from the user referring to a nonexisting file or specifying an invalid path.

Note that your `is_palindrome()` function is expected to err when used with input that is not a single string. However, depending on your implementation of the function, it might work perfectly well when used with input that is a list, not a string. To avoid the misuse of your function in this situation, you should include an `assert` statement in your function to ensure the input is a string.

### Sample Execution

Assume the user has the `palindrome.py` script in the same directory as the following `input.txt` file:

```text
classroom
level
precedent
radar
radio
refer
wilderness
```

Here is what the execution of the `palindrome.py` script should look like when used with `input.txt`:

```text
Input file: input.txt
Output file: output.txt
3 palindromes found in input.txt and stored in output.txt
```

The contents of the created `output.txt` file should be as follows:

```text
level
radar
refer
```

If the user specifies a nonexisting input file or there is an error reading from the specified input file, an appropriate message should be displayed.

```text
Input file: random.txt
Output file: output.txt
Unable to read file random.txt
```

The same applies for when there is an error writing to the specified output file. Note that this is rare and only happens when the file is write-protected or locked for editing.

```text
Input file: input.txt
Output file: output.txt
Unable to write to file output.txt
```

### Testing your Program

There is a file `words.txt` included in your assignment repository. It is a collection of 370,103 English words, with the term *word* being very loosely defined here. Your script should be able to detect all 232 palindromes present in this file.

Demonstrate this by including a file `palindromes.txt` in your assignment repository that is generated using your script and contains all 232 palindromes. Note that you should also create your own input files and test your program using those as well, however you are not required to submit any of those files.

### Extra Credit Opportunities

#### Detailed Error Messages

For full credit, it is okay when your program displays the same error message both when the specified input file does not exist and when the specified input file does exist but the script encounters an error reading from it (which is rare but could happen in certain situations). For an additional 10 points, utilize `try ... except` in a manner that allows you display a different error message in these two situations:

- The specified input file does not exist.
- The specified input file does exist but the program is unable to read it for some reason.

For example, when the file `random.txt` does not exist in the same directory as the script, the following should happen:

```text
Input file: random.txt
Output file: output.txt
File random.txt not found
```

And if the file `input.txt` does exist but for some reason there is an error when reading from it:

```text
Input file: input.txt
Output file: output.txt
Unable to read file input.txt
```

```{tip}
There are different classes of exceptions that get raised in different situations and the `except` statement can be modified to catch only a specific class of error instead of all of them. You might want to investigate what kind of errors get raised in these different situations.
```

#### Command-Line Arguments

For up to an additional 40 points, modify your `palindrome.py` program to use command-line arguments instead of the `input()` function. At a minimum, your program should take two positional command-line arguments with the first being the input file and the second being the output file. For example, execution of your program using the aforementioned example should resemble the following:

```text
python palindrome.py input.txt output.txt
3 palindromes found in input.txt and stored in output.txt
```

To earn all of the available extra credit points, your command-line program should have the following optional flags:
- `--help` or `-h` that displays a help message on how to use the program
- `--quiet` or `-q` that omits the message specifying how many palindromes were found

```text
python palindrome.py --help
usage: palindrome.py [-h] [-q] input_file output_file
```

```text
python palindrome.py input.txt output.txt --quiet
```

At a minimum, your program should display a simple usage string when run with the `-h` or `--help` flag, like in the above example. However, a more detailed help message is highly encouraged. Your program should also display appropriate error messages when used with invalid command-line arguments.

```{tip}
You can use `sys.argv` to get a list of command-line arguments passed to your script. And although it is entirely possible to create a command-line interface by combining `sys.argv` with control flow statements, there already exists a perfectly good Python module that does that. This is the `argparse` module and you should definitely check it out. Note that there exist many alternatives to the `argparse` module, including the built-in `getopt` module and numerous third-party packages. While all of them have their particular niche, the `argparse` module is the recommended approach to creating command-line interfaces for Python programs.
```

## Helpful Resources

Here are some resources that you might find useful when completing this assignment:
- String methods:
    - Official reference: https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#string-methods
    - Brief overview: https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_ref_string.asp
- File I/O:
    - Official tutorial: https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/inputoutput.html#reading-and-writing-files
    - `open()` function reference: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#open
    - Brief overviews:
        - File handling: https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_file_handling.asp
        - Reading files: https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_file_open.asp
        - Writing files: https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_file_write.asp
- Exception handling:
    - Official tutorial: https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/errors.html#handling-exceptions
    - Brief overview: https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_try_except.asp
- Assertions:
    - Brief overview: https://www.w3schools.com/python/ref_keyword_assert.asp
- Command-line arguments:
    - `argparse` tutorial: https://docs.python.org/3/howto/argparse.html
    - `argparse` reference: https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html

## Submission Details

Make sure to use `git push` to push any commits to the GitHub server before the end of the grace period. Any changes not reflected on GitHub by the end of the grace period will not be considered. If you feel like you need more time, reach out the the instructor and we will work something out.

Your code should include comments and [docstrings](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0257/) where appropriate and adhere to the [PEP 8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/) standard. Because this assignment is only one script, we will be paying more attention to style, documentation, and git usage.

Your README should thoroughly document your `palindrome.py` program. A good documentation describes the inputs and outputs, instructs the end user how to run your program, and outlines any limitations of your implementation. Remember to also include the number of hours you spent working on this assignment, cite any references, and note anyone you received help from or discussed the assignment with. Additionally, feel free to utilize the README to provide feedback and share your thoughts. As before, your README should be neatly formatted and pleasant to read both as raw and rendered text.

Make sure to thoroughly test your program before submitting and do not forget to include the `palindromes.txt` file!

Points will be awarded as follows:

- Palindrome Extractor (80 + 50)
    - `palindrome.py` (70)
    - `palindromes.txt` (10)
    - Extra Credit Opportunities (50)
        - Detailed Error Messages (10)
        - Command-Line Arguments (40)
- Other (20)
    - `README.md` (10)
    - Repository activity (5)
    - Good commit messages (5)